WIM: Hello, everyone.
In this short video,
I want to give you
an intuition on how type
inference in Haskell works.
As you know, in Haskell, you
can provide type signatures
to functions, but
you don't have to.
And if you don't,
then the type checker
will work out what the
types are of the functions
that you have provided.
And I want to kind of give
an idea of how that works,
that process that the type
checker uses to figure out
what types your functions
that you defined
would actually have.
So let's just take an example
of a function of x and xs,
which we define like this.
So we have a function of
two arguments-- x and xs.
And it returns the sum
of the first argument
and the length of
the second argument.
So then the question
is, what is the type
of this particular function?
And so the answer is that
the type checker will
try putting very general types.
So it will say this--
this is a and this is b.
And this is as good
as it gets for me now.
And so it will say f is
a b, and then some c.
And then it will try to
infer the constraints on each
of these type variables.
And the more it can be
constrained, the better.
So in the end, hopefully
it will be so constrained
that it will no longer
be a type variable,
but a particular concrete type.
So in this particular case, we
have already, from the Prelude,
we have types for
the plus operation
and for the length function.
So we know that plus
is of type Num a,
and that the length is of
type-- let's call this b,
maybe, because they don't
have to be the same.
So we know that
length of xs, if this
has to be a valid type
checking function,
this will have to
be of type Int.
And we know, from the type
signature of the addition,
that the types of both
arguments must be the same.
So consequently, this will
also have to be of type Int.
So, because the x
here is the x here,
we already know that our type of
our first argument must be Int.
For the type of
our next argument,
well, we know that
it's a list because we
call the length function on it.
But that's really
all we can tell
because we don't need to
know what's in the list
to calculate its length.
So the type of the arguments
of the list are not important.
So that means that, in the
end, the type inference
will say that it has found a
function which takes an Int
and something-- a list
of some arbitrary type--
and it will return an Int.
And so it works.
So the type checker tries to
apply more and more constraints
so that it can actually
resolve the entire types.
So for instance, if we had
done something like this, then
automatically, we
would know that head
xs would have to
be also type Int.
Now, we know the signature
for the head function.
So we know this, which
means that this list would
have to be of type Integer.
So you see, by making the
expression a little bit
different, we used the
element of the list,
and immediately,
the type inference
can tell us that this has
to be a list of Integers.
And so, in general, that's
how the whole process works.
It works by a combination of
the structure of the types
and the type definitions
of the basic functions
in the Prelude.
There's actually a
lot more to this,
but we will cover this
in a later lecture.